Now what do you do if you're running Windows and the
application that you're running hangs up.
It could be that it quits unexpectedly,
but it could be that it just freezes altogether.
The worst situation is when your entire Windows environment freezes.
Sometimes you can just get up, go get a cup of coffee or drink of water,
come back,
and whatever was hanging the system is resolved and you're back in business,
but what I'm getting around to is how can you forcibly
control the applications that are currently running and in
memory on your Windows 10 box.
For historical perspective, we had way back when Windows 3.
1 the task list which would bring up, sure enough,
a list of any open windows, even windows are considered tasks or processes.
A process is different from a program because a program might
have multiple processes associated with it.
What do I mean, Tim, right.
Well think of like the Google Chrome browser as a good example.
When you start Chrome,
you think you're running just a single instance of that application.
It's a process that consumes CPU and memory, disk space, and network.
That's true.
But did you know that when you open up multiple tabs in Chrome,
processes are actually spawned for each of those open tabs,
so if you have a whole bunch of tabs,
you can wind up with a number of Chrome processes and that can wind up,
depending upon how much memory you have on your system,
slowing down the system and even hanging it up.
So that's tools like task list and in Windows 10 Task
Manager give you some really nice control.
We're going to go right to the demo on this so I can show
you how to use Windows 10 Task Manager.
In this demonstration, we'll work with Task Manager in Windows 10.
Remember that Task Manager is a built-in utility,
there is nothing that you have to install,
that gives you control over the running applications on your system and
actually Task Manager has a heck of a lot more built into it.
Let me show you.
Many different ways keyboard combinations,
etc,
but one way is by right-clicking an empty area of the
task bar you have Task Manager.
And by default,
Task Manager opens in a simplified interface that
just simply lists running programs.
Remember,
a program or an application can consist of multiple individual processes,
but this is showing us just the top-level programs,
and as you see, I have Edge and I have Microsoft PowerPoint running.
Now I've got some issues with my system in terms of it displaying a
generic program icon instead of the PowerPoint icon,
but we can ignore that for a second.
If we want to stop an application,
if it's not responding and Windows knows that it's not responding,
it will say parentheses not responding and you may have to end the task.
Most applications nowadays have recovery built into them such that the
likelihood of you losing work and losing data is minimized,
but it's still always possible so I want to make sure to relay that
caveat to you that when you're using Task Manager a lot of times it's
a last resort way to stop an application.
Let me right-click, go to Run, and open PowerPoint again.
If you know the executable program name of a program, you can always use it.
As a matter of fact, you know, for Task Manager,
it always used to be T-A-S-K-M-G-R.
Let's see if that works.
Yep, it looks like it still does, that's cool.
But I'll come back to run and type powerpnt,
that historically has been the executable program
file name for Microsoft PowerPoint.
Okay, if we right-click these guys,
notice that we can switch our attention to the app.
It may not be stuck, it just might be minimized and we don't see it,
you see what I mean.
Bring back Task Manager again here, right-click,
we have End Task, Run New Task which allows you to start a program,
it's basically the equivalent of doing a Windows
key+R to open the Run box down below.
What else do we have?
Always on top, Open file location, that can be awfully helpful.
When you're working with applications and especially ones
that you don't recognize that are running,
you can try right-clicking, open file location,
and in this case, it shows us that PowerPoint.
exe is located under C, Program Files, Microsoft Office,
Office15, which is correct,
so I'm not concerned that this is questionable software.
Properties, let's quickly bring that up.
That brings up the properties sheet of the executable.
Unfortunately,
Microsoft digitally signs their software which serves as a verification method.
If we right-click and choose Search online,
again,
this is very helpful when you're troubleshooting possible malicious
software and it simply opened your default browser,
which on my system is Edge, your default search engine,
which in my case is Bing,
and it searched for that program file name and the executable name.
In the previous demo, I really didn't show too much about Edge specifically.
If you've never used the Edge browser,
it is meant to be a minimal learning curve from Internet Explorer,
but if you've used Firefox or Chrome, you should feel pretty at home.
We have this tabbed interface where you can click + to invoke new tabs.
This star icon is a hub where you can get to your downloads and your favorites,
your shortcuts as they're called in other browsers,
and all of these little tabs can be pinned off to the side.
One thing that Edge offers that other browsers don't have to the best of my
knowledge is the ability to add notes and highlighting directly to a web
page and you can actually save the web note,
which I'll do right now, it gets saved to Microsoft OneNote by default,
and we also have a share option where you can share your web notes with
other users using a variety of different mechanisms.
OneNote, of course, comes with the Microsoft Office Suite,
but notice that there are extensions that you can add in,
that's what the install means here,
that allow you to share your web annotations via various social media channels.
That's a pretty cool feature that I wanted to make sure to show you.
It's the icon that looks like a little highlighting pen.
And then if we open the ellipses, this is where you can get to the actual menu.
This is what I found is most confusing to end users.
If they want to get to settings and where to do
extensions and this kind of stuff,
there is no menu as such and there is no button.
You need this ellipses button, it's called the Settings and more button,
and this gives you most of your controls,
zoom, you can directly open the Favorites Pane.
Let's see open it again.
We come down to the very bottom,
we have Settings and this is where you can customize when you open the browser,
open a new tab, do you see a blank page or some other option.
You can clear out your browsing data so on and so forth.
The final thing I want to show in this menu are the extensions.
Like I said, instead of browser helper objects,
Edge uses an extension model and it works through the Microsoft store.
From what I've seen,
most or all of these extensions are free and some of them are super helpful.
A lot of my productivity is with Evernote and it's nice to be able
to integrate Evernote into my Edge experience,
especially because it's free.
You'll notice that I'm able to just click through and install it transparently,
it comes down from my system.
There is a description, there is ratings and reviews that you can take a look at,
and then to launch it, it should show up on my toolbar here.
Let me turn on the extension, sure, there it is,
and then when you open it,
the behavior of the extension is going to be wholly dependent on what it is.
In Evernote, of course, I'm going to have to log into my Evernote account.
There are other extensions that suppress advertisements,
for instance, all that kind of stuff.
So anyway,
that's your mini tutorial on Edge that I forgot to
give you in the previous demo.
I don't know if you noticed it,
but Microsoft's store was also in this Task Manager list.
I don't like this simplified view quite honestly because it's too bare bones.
So if you click More details,
you get a Task Manager view that's much more familiar too if
you've used it in previous versions of Windows,
where first of all, let me double left-click the title bar to maximize,
you get a really nice nested list of both the application,
as well as the individual processes within it.
It looks like Edge, for instance, has separate processes not only for each tab,
here's that Harman Kardon Invoke advertisement that we looked at before,
but there are some other ones that may not be particularly familiar,
but remember,
you can right-click and you can go to details which
takes you over to the Details tab.
This is where you can see very detailed specifics on a per process basis.
Specifically,
you can see stuff like how much memory these different processes are using.
You can click the columns to do a reverse sort.
My system is largely idol as you see, that's a good thing.
All of these things are right-clickable and you can
end the task on them if you want to.
You can open the file location to figure out exactly where
that asset exists on the file system, you can search online.
So that's processes and details.
Again, these are clickable so that you can aggregate to see,
for instance, what is my most memory hungry application and process.
Well in this case,
it looks like it's Edge and it looks like that Evernote tab
is consuming the most memory right now.
Performance allows you to see real time data on how your
system is performing hardware wise with CPU,
that's your processor, memory, disk, and network,
a lot of good information here.
If you're suspecting that your system is hung up,
you'll want to come here to confirm that.
App history shows you run times of applications over time.
A lot of these tabs in here are great for malware troubleshooting because by
getting a handle on what applications normally show up,
you should find anomalous ones much easier.
In the previous module when we looked at the Registry,
I showed you the startup,
the fact that you could look in your run keys to see applications and
processes that are scheduled to start automatically every time.
Here on the Startup tab, it not only lists those,
but also gives you a startup impact on how much the
particular object will slow down your system,
and notice again, you can right-click to disable,
open the location, search online, or look for properties.
It makes sense that the OneDrive application has a high startup
impact because it needs to log you into your account,
it needs to check to see the synchronization status of all of your
files on your system via say what's in the cloud,
etc.
Users, we can see what's going in a per user basis.
In Windows 10, I found that this is almost always just you.
Details we've been to.
And services are longer running processes that typically run in the background.
I'm running the VMware extension because this is a VMware virtual machine so it
would make sense that I have some services related to that.
Let me do an A to Z sort here and then scrolling through, that's fine.
Let me close out of Task Manager.
In terms of wrapping up this demo,
I want to go back to something else I had mentioned earlier yet in this module,
sweeping up the shavings.
Remember with Cortana it functions on trust as I've said too many times and
you might decide that you don't want to use Cortana at all.
That's perfectly fine.
As long as your Windows 10 is patched to the Fall 2017 creators update,
you can do this with, drumroll please, Group Policy.
Remember we learned in the previous module that Group
Policy provides a way to more centrally manage the registry
settings on multiple computers,
but there are some settings that either you can go to the Registry for,
there is no Control Panel interface for it,
so in this case, we've got Group Policy.
So I'm going to right-click the Start button and go to Run.
Do you remember what the msc name is for the Group Policy editor?
It's gpedit.
msc, and in that editor,
I'm going to maximize the view by double left-clicking the title
bar and I'm going to drag the split bar over.
We'll want to go through the path, Computer Configuration,
Administrative Templates, Windows Components,
Search, here it is, and let's make sure our policies are sorted alphabetically.
We have the policy called Allow Cortana.
You notice that the extended view here gives you a little
description of what the policy settings does.
If you don't want to see that, you can flip it to standard.
But in any case, we'll double left-click,
and by default, all of your policies are not configured,
so they're just quietly present, they're not doing anything.
Now this is one of those ones that requires a little logic.
If we enable Allow Cortana, is that going to disable Cortana?
No.
Enabling the policy explicitly allows Cortana.
If you want to turn Cortana off on that system,
you'll need to set this policy to disabled, you'll want to click OK or Apply, and then restart the computer.